Good afternoon, ladies and gentlemen.
Please welcome the
User Experience Technology Manager,
John Galenzi.
Good afternoon.
Welcome to session 144.
This belongs to the user
experience sub-track,
sort of.
And the reason for that is that
In all of the user
experience sessions so far,
we've been talking about
Aqua-related things,
so the look and feel of TAN,
how to properly design icons,
how to lay out your dialogues,
these sorts of things that we
talked about in the Aqua overview
and some of the other sessions that
have occurred so far this week.
As I said in the Aqua overview session
the first day of the conference,
the Macintosh is known as
being friendly and easy to use.
It's known as being consistent.
And one of the most sort of notorious
behaviors of the Macintosh is
that when you... Movement of files
around the file system is very easy.
You can move folders
of whole applications.
And when you move files and
documents from applications around,
the Mac always knows which
application created it.
When you double click it,
it knows which app to launch
and these sorts of things.
And it never sort of forgets
these types of relationships.
This session is going to talk
about a lot of... It's going to
talk about this subject matter and
we're going to talk about packages,
which are new for 10.
Well, they're on 9,
but they're important for 10.
So there's a packaging your applications,
putting all of the pertinent files
in one place so that users have a
really great user experience of moving
those things around as one unit.
And we're also going to talk about
the relationship of documents to
applications and so to welcome on stage,
to talk about this material,
I'd like to call Arno Gerdahl,
who comes from the user experience
engineering team at Apple.
Arno Gerdahl
Good afternoon, everyone.
So I know this is a -- if
you come to this session,
you probably are wondering a
lot about what we're thinking.
And I hope that by the end of this
session we'll have answered some
of that question and that you'll
feel better about this whole topic.
My name is Arno Gourdol.
I work in the User Experience Department.
I'm going to talk to you
today about two main things.
The first one is
[Transcript missing]
The other thing I'm going to talk about
is the double-click user experience,
you know,
what happens when you double-click.
Again, that's more like a behavior,
but that's a very important one,
and Mac OS has always had a very
good user experience in that regard,
and obviously we're making
changes in Mac OS X,
which I'm going to talk about.
So, back in the old days,
an application was a single file,
and it was very easy.
When you wanted to
install the application,
you just dragged it.
That was it,
and you had everything with it.
Everything used to be in a resource fork.
I don't know if you remember that.
It was years ago.
With the introduction of PowerPC,
the code portion got
moved to the data fork.
So, in the data fork,
you had the code itself,
and then in the resource fork,
you had the resources
for the application,
the strings that needed to be localized,
the user interface, and so on.
Today, on Mac OS X, that still works.
You can still have that.
You can still have your
application in one single file.
Data four contains the code.
Resource four contains the resources.
And you can have either a corb, CRRB,
or PLST resource-- and I'll talk about
that one in a little bit more detail
in a while-- to tell the system that
you're not just a classic application,
but that you're a Carbon application,
and that we should not try to launch
you in the classic environment,
but just in the regular
Carbon environment.
So that's the minor difference
between what we may have had before
and what we have in Mac OS X as
far as single file applications.
The thing about single file applications,
though,
is that contrary to this
very simple picture,
where you have like just one icon and
everything looks simple and all that,
nowadays what you're more likely
to see is something like that,
where you have maybe one
file for the application,
sure, but you have a lot of auxiliary
files next to the application,
whether that be the help system,
the help content, some sample code,
some sample documents,
or sample code if you're doing
a development environment,
and all sort of stuff that kind
of makes it more difficult for
the user to know actually what
is it supposed to double click.
And also that makes the
application more fragile,
because it means that if
they move the wrong file,
the application may not launch anymore.
And you know that that's the kind
of experience that may happen
on some other operating systems,
but we really don't want
that to happen on Mac OS X.
So, we're doing things to fix that,
to go back to the good old
simplicity that we had before.
And to do that,
we're introducing the concept
of application bundle.
Let me just tell you that,
I apologize in advance that we haven't
been very consistent in our terminology.
You may have heard the term
package and bundle and used
sometimes interchangeably.
We're going to try to be
more consistent from now on,
we promise.
So we're going to talk about
application bundle to talk about
the way an application is packaged.
And we're going to talk about file
packages to talk about documents
that have a similar format.
But bear with me,
bundle package is still the same thing.
So, what's a bundle?
It is a directory,
instead of being a single file,
as we had before.
It is now a directory.
And to know that it's a directory
that actually contains an application,
there are three ways
that we can identify it.
The first one is you can set a bit.
There's a special bit in the
HFS metadata that can indicate
that this is a bundle folder.
And that's actually the bundle bit,
which had been unused.
It was only used for
documents until Mac OS 8.5,
Mac OS 9, Mac OS 9.
But now it actually means that the entire
folder is to be considered one unit,
if you will, one bundle.
There's also a special file that we're
looking for inside the directory.
And if we find it,
we know that's a package.
So it's a second way to do it.
I'll talk about that file in
more details in a little while.
And finally, there's another way that
this can be indicated,
is by using an extension,
a three-letter extension, .app.
There you go.
but it's not over
That can tell the system
that this is also a package,
even though it may not
have the bundle bit set,
and even though it may not have
the package info filed in there.
So the reason for the extension there
is just in case the application gets
moved around into maybe a file system
that doesn't know how to deal with that,
with the HFS metadata,
and the bundle bit gets unset for
some reason or something like that.
So it's like more a safety
precaution than anything else.
Important thing to remember:
.app is not required.
You have two other ways to
indicate that your application
is actually an application.
OK, all right.
Now,
there are a few bugs left in the DP4.
Otherwise we would ship it.
And one of them is the way-- sometimes
you actually need really to put
it in .app to make it understand.
Another thing that we are not
doing in the DP4 right now is
that if your application has .app,
we'll actually display it
in the file system and we'll
want to change that later.
So there's a few caveats with
DP4 we're not quite done,
but that's the direction that we want
to go where you can that something is
a package one of three ways you choose
If you are familiar with the
previous version of Mac OS X,
Mac OS X Server and before,
there was another format for
bundles that was slightly different
than what I'm going to talk about.
That format is still supported.
We still recognize,
we still understand it,
but we don't recommend you using it.
So you can just,
if you don't know about it,
you can just forget about it.
And if you are using it,
you should consider
using the new format now.
So what's inside this directory?
We have multiple binaries for
different runtime environments,
multiple localizations,
and all the auxiliary files that
may not be that important for the
user to see and that could break
the app if they get moved around.
What's important about all this, though,
is that we want to get back to that.
We want to have everything
that makes an application be
presented as a single icon.
That's the goal.
To go back to the simplicity
that we had 16 years ago,
even though things have changed
a little bit in the meantime.
So the way we're doing this is
that we're having this box with
all this neat content inside of it.
But it's a nice way to put
everything together and to carry
everything together around.
And you can use it as a whole
without having to dig through it.
And that's what the user is going to see.
That's the user experience
we want to have.
We want to have one icon,
one application, something very simple.
That doesn't mean that you can't
have any files outside of it.
Maybe it makes sense to have a readme
next to it or something like that.
But again, nothing important
should be outside of it.
Now, let's see what's inside the box.
We're going to open it,
and I'm going to talk about all the
components of what goes inside a package.
This is kind of what it looks like.
I'm using this fictitious--well,
actually, it's not so fictitious.
It's on the CDP4 CD,
but it's a sample app.
It's called Sketch.
And at the top you have
the Sketch directory,
which is what it really is.
And inside of it there are
a number of subdirectories,
which I'm going to detail.
You'll notice that I'm using
two colors on the slides.
The things that are in
yellow are the things that,
for which the system expects the
name to be what is indicated here.
You can't choose it to
be anything you want.
The things that are in
white is left up to you.
So that's going to be true
in this slide and the others
I'm going to have after that.
So, the first thing,
the thing that matters the most, I guess,
is the binary, the actual executable
for your application.
Where it's located is inside contents,
which is basically where
most everything is.
And inside of there, there is a directory
that's called Mac OS,
with no space, that contains the,
that's expected to contain
the binary for Mac OS X.
This binary can be either a
CFM or Mac OS based binary.
It doesn't matter.
Both either will work.
And it can contain a resource
fork if you want one.
In the case of CFM, you really do.
Otherwise,
it's not going to work so well.
In the case of Mac OS, you don't have to.
In general, I know that there is
some concern about that,
too, about resource fork,
and some confusion about
what we're saying there.
What we want to have is we want to
have something that works really
well in environments that don't
support resource forks that well,
like other operating systems,
other volume formats,
so that we can operate nicely with
all those different environments.
And one way to make that easier is to
not rely on the resource forks so much.
It doesn't mean never use resource forks.
It means if you can live
without resource forks,
if you can do everything we do
today without resource forks,
or using a different format
for the resource forks,
which I'm going to talk about,
then that means that your application,
for example,
can live on a server that doesn't
know anything about HFS metadata
and can still work there.
That means that you can use
some wonderful utilities
such as Tor to package your
application and ship it around,
or you can easily FTP it or whatever.
So there are some advantages to that.
And, you know,
we're encouraging you to do that.
As much as possible,
that's what we're trying
to do on the system.
The system we're trying to have
everything work potentially
without relying on HFS,
although, of course,
the system is designed
to work best on HFS.
So that's the binary.
You can have resources in there,
but there's a better place for it,
and I'll talk about it in a while.
So what we recommend that you have
here is just the code that's necessary
to make your application do something.
Next is a very important file,
and I'm going to talk about
it several times today.
We call it the plist, or Info.plist.
Sometimes it's also
called info-macos.plist.
And the reason for that is because
you can have either a generic version
or a version that's specific to
Mac OS X or a version that's specific
to another runtime environment.
It's basically always the same file.
It's an XML file.
That contains a lot of information
about your application.
The system uses that to basically
know everything there is to
know about your application.
What's your name, when were you born,
what documents you know how to open,
everything you know how to do,
which icon should be displayed
for your application,
and so on.
And I'll go into some detail about
the content of that file in a while.
Package info is another file in
there that is a very simple file.
It's eight bytes and it basically
contains just the type and creator,
which is also information that's
available in the Info.plist.
It's redundant and the reason why we
have it here is only for performance
reasons so that we can very quickly
find out what the type and creator
of a package is without having
to pass the XML file necessarily.
So it's an optimization,
but that file is important
because I talked about it earlier,
the presence of this file can help
us figure out that something that
looks like a directory in fact
should be presented as a single file,
whether it's an application or an
application bundle or a file package.
If you don't have a creator,
for some reason your application
doesn't have a creator because it's a
legacy application for whatever reason,
that's okay.
You can still put, you know,
for question mark as the creator.
That will work and
we'll just use the type,
which in that case would be
appl if you're an application.
Finally, in the resources directory,
we have everything else.
And I'm going to show you what that is.
The first thing is going to be something
that all your apps are going to have,
which is an icon for
the application itself.
The PList contains a reference,
which is the name of the
file that contains the icon.
And you're going to look for
that file inside Resources.
So here you see it displayed in white.
It means the name can
be whatever you want.
But it will have to be the same
one that's specified in the PList,
of course, that we know to find it.
If you have icons for
your documents as well,
that's where they would be as well.
And the PList, again,
would indicate what the name
of those files are so that
we know where to find them.
You can have your own
stuff in there as well.
If your applications support
filters of some sort,
export filters or graphic filters or
any kind of additional data things
that the user can install optionally,
that kind of stuff,
you can put that in there as well.
You can have subdirectories.
You can organize that however you want,
exactly the same way that you would
organize your application today
if it was just in one big folder.
So that's up to you.
We don't impose any
organization in there.
You can also have a file that's
going to contain resources in the
Macintosh sense of the world and
Mac OS Toolbox sense of the world.
If you have a file in there that
has the same name as your binary,
but it has .rsrc at the end,
we will open that automatically
for you because we'll know about
it and we'll figure out that you
probably want to use that file.
Before I was telling you, you know,
if you want,
you can have binary that doesn't
contain any of the resources,
it just contains the code.
You can do that,
have the resources in there,
and when your binary gets launched,
this file will be open
automatically for you so that,
you know,
you don't really have to do anything.
It works like it always did,
even though the things are
now living in two files.
Now, one thing that's
important about resources,
whether it's this particular
resource file or others you may have,
is that with DP4 we're introducing
a new format for resources.
And that format-- hang onto your
seats-- it's a resource fork
that lives in the data fork.
So it's exactly as if you had, you know,
what you would have in a resource fork,
the same binary stream, if you will,
except it is stored in a data fork.
That's exactly how we're
going to call that,
resources in data fork
or something like that.
But the advantage of that,
the reason why we did that,
is that what it means is that anybody,
any OS that's out there today,
any utilities or whatever,
knows about those things.
They can back them up,
they can compress them,
they can encrypt them,
they can do whatever they want with them.
It's just a file for them,
it doesn't matter.
And the resource manager now has
routines that allow you to open
those things and create them
and manipulate them and so on.
But again, as I mentioned,
if you just put that file in
that location with the name
of your binary and .rsrc,
we'll just open it for you.
Whether it's stored in a data fork,
whether it's stored in a resource fork,
it doesn't matter.
You'll just get your resources.
That's what counts for you.
The resources that are in
this particular location,
that are just in the resources directory,
are things that should not be localized.
And sometimes it happens,
maybe there's a logo of
your application in there,
maybe there is some various
data that you need to have
in there for whatever reason.
But those that are in there should
be things that are not localized,
that will stay the same no matter what
the user preferred localization is.
The things that do need to get localized,
however, go into a folder
That's called, for example,
English.lproj.
Obviously,
that's not the only name it can have.
There are some relatively generic
names that indicate the region,
like English and French and Japanese.
And you can also have more
specific one if you want so
that you can have find level
A great deal of control
so that you could have,
for example, the French-Canadian version
versus the French version or
the Belgian version or whatever.
And the system will pick which one
to use based on the user preference.
You don't have to do anything.
As long as you provide those directories,
the system will do the right thing
and will pick whatever is available.
So if the user said, you know,
I really like to have my
applications in French,
and you happen to have
a French localization,
that's what will be used.
If you don't have one,
we'll fall back according
to the user preferences.
And if you only have one,
that's the one we will use.
And again, you don't really have to do
anything for that except follow
this layout for your application.
So that allows you to ship one
application that contains multiple
localization for your different markets.
It's a very efficient way of doing it.
Inside this directory,
there's a special file that you can
have that's called localized.rsrc.
And the same as the one I took before,
sketch.rsrc.
It can be the file that contains the
resource fork with your resources in it.
Or it can be a file that's your data
fork that contains the resources.
And just like the other file,
it will be open automatically.
So you'll have both the non-localized
resources as well as the localized
resources open by the time that
your application is running.
And the right ones, too,
without any effort on your part.
If you have other type of data
that needs to be localized,
for example a help file,
you can put it in there as well.
And you can use some APIs to find
those files and to find the right ones,
to find the English one
versus the French one,
you know,
depending on the user choices and so on.
There are APIs to do that
that make it really easy.
Okay,
so that's kind of what's in resources.
A lot of information that we're
really hiding from the user
because they're not interested in
those details most of the time.
Overall, that's what an application
bundle looks like on Mac OS X.
It's a directory with a lot of structure,
a lot of files.
Some have to be there
because the system uses them.
Others,
they are left for you to put whatever
you need to put in that folder.
When we introduced Mac OS 9,
we introduced what we
called app packages.
We're calling them bundles now.
They're the same thing.
They haven't changed, just the name.
And the structure is slightly different.
And that might have confused
you when we were talking about
bundles and packages and,
you know,
looking at the tech notes and saying,
"Hmm, it looks like this.
I look on DP3, it looks nothing like it."
So what does it all mean?
That's what it looks like on Mac OS 9.
Or that's what we recommend
that it looks like on Mac OS 9.
On Mac OS 9,
you have much fewer constraints about
what the layout of your directory is,
mostly because the
system does less for you.
The only constraints that you have
really for Mac OS X is that you
should set a bundle bit on the folder,
because that's the only thing
that Mac OS X recognizes.
And at the top level of this folder,
you should have an alias
to your application,
to the binary that you
want to use on Mac OS X.
It might be the same one that
you are using on Mac OS X if
you're a Carbon application that
can run in both environments.
Or you can choose to have
a completely different one,
to have an application that's
completely tailored to Mac OS X and
have a completely different
application running from Mac OS X.
A completely different binary,
I should say.
But from your user point of view,
it will be the same app.
This alias should be relative.
That's detailed in the tech note.
I'll give you the reference
to the tech note so you can
find more details about that.
So that, again,
the thing can be moved around
and the alias will always
point to the right binary.
One thing that we're enhancing over
what we have described in the tech
note previously is the addition
of--it's just a suggestion for 9,
really.
It helps make things more consistent.
And that's the addition of the
contents directory with the
Mac OS Classic directory inside of it.
And the reason for that is because
it's going to mesh well with Mac OS X.
So, on 9 you could have something
that looks like this.
The alias, contents, Mac OS Classic,
and then in there,
your binary and whatever files you have.
Of course, on 9 you don't get support
for multiple localization.
It just works like it does on 9.
And if you want,
if you're doing a Carbon application
and you want that application to
be able to run both on 9 and on 10,
you can merge those two models together.
So you get something like this.
On this side over there,
you have Mac OS Classic that contains
all the stuff that's needed for 9,
your binary, help file,
whatever is needed there.
You have the alias that points
to somewhere in there that's
going to be used by Mac OS 9.
On the other side,
you have the Mac OS Info.plist packaging
for resources that are used by 10.
What's important, though,
is that at the top,
you have only one item.
When the user double clicks on that item,
that icon that they see in the finder,
whether it's on 9 or on 10,
the right thing happens.
Although it's going to be something
completely different depending
on the runtime environment,
but from the user point of view,
the right thing happened.
And again,
they can move it around and all
the pieces come together and
they don't have to worry about,
I don't know if I need that file,
I don't know,
that doesn't look right to me,
and the application doesn't work anymore.
Don't want that.
At this point,
I'm going to give you a little
demo to show you what a package
application bundle looks like.
If we can.
Yeah!
So I'm running classic, you noticed?
It works, kind of.
So, let's have a look at that.
So I have this CD here that
contains-- that's a CD that
I've inserted in the machine.
That's a fake thing.
I just pressed that last night.
But I can give you an idea of the
things you can do now with Mac OS X.
For one thing, you'll notice that I have
a background for my app.
And it's not made up of little
icons that are put together.
You can't select them
and move them around.
It's a picture.
So we can take advantage of that
to make some interesting things.
And then there are a few things
that are at the top level of the CD,
like the icon for my app,
which is actually an app bundle,
and goodies that contains the installer
stuff and maybe additional stuff
that a user might want to install,
and just a README file.
So the idea is that a
user just bought your app,
they put the CD in,
they read the README if they
want to-- hopefully they will.
And they just drag the app maybe.
In some cases, you might not even need
to have an installer.
So keep the things as simple as possible.
So let's have a look inside
that application here.
I'm going to do a get info on it so
you can have a look at what's inside.
And I'm going to give you a few
tricks that you might want to write
down because I don't think we've
actually put that in the documentation,
and it is useful during your development.
In GetInfo, there are several panels
that apply to this item.
One of them that's particularly
interesting is application files.
It kind of gives you an
idea of what's inside.
But sometimes you really want
to look inside the folder.
And we used to have a button in DP3
to do that that we removed in DP4.
It might come back.
But in the meantime, very important,
and that's where you want to write down,
you want to press the Option key while
you double-click on the icon there.
So, new in DP4 is a relaunch service that
relaunches your apps really quickly.
Let me give that another try.
[Transcript missing]
So, that's the content of my package.
I'm viewing it at least through
here so we can disclose the
thing and see what's inside it.
This is a package that was designed
to work both on 9 and on 10.
So at the top level here,
it has an alias to the application
that I want to use on 9.
That application itself is in there,
inside contents, Mac OS Classic.
And now that's where
I'm playing with fire.
I'm actually going to try to launch it to
show you something that's kind of cool.
This, believe it or not,
is actually MacDraw 0.9.
Look at the date, August '84,
and it still runs on Mac OS X.
So the point of this is that you can have
a very different app for your Mac OS 9
version than you have on Mac OS X.
Of course, if you want, of course,
you can have a carbonized version that's
going to work both on 9 and on 10.
The other stuff that you have in here,
in here I have some custom folders
that are specific to my application,
color palettes here.
The very important Info.plist that
contains all this stuff about my app.
Later on I'll go into more
detail what's in there.
And then in there I have the binary
for my Mac OS X version of my app.
This happens to be a Cocoa,
Java Cocoa app.
While this one obviously isn't.
So we see we support multiple runtimes.
That's kind of cool.
The package info file that tells us
about the type and creator of that thing.
And then the plugin,
another folder for my app.
And then inside resources,
a bunch of other files that my
app needs to have access to.
Some TIFF files that contain
different pictures displayed in
the user interface of this app.
The localized version of resources.
The nib,
since it's a Cocoa app and so on.
So you can go in there,
move things around,
do whatever you want with it.
Of course, you don't want to encourage
your users to do that,
but sometimes they may need to
actually have access to that
and we'll give them access.
But that should really be the backdoor
version of configuration of your app.
I've mentioned that we also
support multiple localization.
So the way that this works is
that in the system preferences,
There is one of the elements
of system preferences,
international.
And international,
you have a list of languages.
And the user can order
that however they want.
If they want to have French first,
they can have French first, then English,
German, whatever.
What that will do is that that
will have a direct effect.
When they double click on their app,
the system will use that list to figure
out in which order to look for languages.
So here if I have put French first,
the first thing the system will look
for would be the French localization.
Open that and use that.
So that's where those
things are controlled.
OK.
I'll come back to this mission later.
There is a session later on
this afternoon that will talk
in more detail about that.
In particular,
it will talk about the APIs that
you have that give you access to the
content of those things so that you
can go in there and ask for files so it
looks in the right directory and so on.
This afternoon's session, 1:57, all A1,
5:00 PM.
If you're interested in that
and what kind of APIs are
available to get access to that,
go to that session.
Okay, now I'm going to move
on to another topic.
Talked about how to
package your app together.
And now I'm going to talk
about what happens when you
double-click on documents.
So that's what we call doc binding.
What it means is the binding of
an application to a document.
In other words,
that's the double-click user experience.
That's a very important part
of the Mac OS experience,
and that's something that
we really care about a lot.
So I'm going to give you five easy
rules to follow for document binding.
And if you follow them,
nobody gets hurt and everything's cool.
First one:
all the app have to have a .app,
and it cannot contain any spaces,
because spaces are evil for Unix.
You can only use /space, right?
Hey, that's the first one.
Come on, I have four more.
All the apps must live inside /bin/app.
Otherwise,
we don't know about those apps,
and they just won't run.
Did someone upload there?
All files must have a
three-letter extension.
Because if they don't,
we just don't know what to do with them.
There is no creator and type.
That's something of the past.
We're moving forward toward
three-letter extension.
No more creator and type.
They're evil.
And finally, hey,
I'm just a misenter here.
And finally, to install an app,
it's very easy.
That's actually what they do on
some other operating systems.
So, for those of you who are believing
everything you read in rumor sites,
But don't.
That's not quite how it works.
What we want to do in Mac OS X with
regard to dark binding is to
preserve the ease-of-use of Mac OS 9.
We're very conscious of that,
and obviously that's something
that we want to preserve
moving forward with Mac OS X.
But that's not where we want to stop.
We don't want to do something
that's just as good as Mac OS 9.
There are a bunch of other things that
we want to take into consideration.
The first one is we want
to play nice with others.
What I mean by that is that we want
to interoperate really well with other
operating systems because we realize
that we don't have 100% market share yet.
We're working on it.
So there are other
operating systems out there,
and it's important that files that
get created on our operating system,
or that your applications,
if they're stored on
remote servers and so on,
work.
And don't get in the way of the
administrator of the servers and so on.
If you know some administrators
of those types of servers today,
you know that they don't always
like when they have Mac users
that get on the servers,
because we tend to leave crud all around.
So we want to behave
better in that regard.
Also,
with regard to different volume formats,
HFS is a great volume format.
It's very modern.
It has multiple forks,
extensive metadata,
all sort of very nice features
that we want to preserve.
And that's why HFS is the main
volume format for Mac OS X.
But at the same time-- we want to
be able to live in an environment
where there are other volume formats
that may not be as smart as HFS is.
So we want to fit in in
this wonderful universe of
We also want to work in an
environment that's much more
networked than it used to be.
Each user can log in.
We want them to be able to have
their different preferences,
not to share them necessarily.
And that requires to make some changes,
which I'll go into more detail.
And finally,
even though the Mac OS 9 user
experience for double-clicking is great,
we think that there are some
improvements that can be made,
in particular for more advanced users.
Think that for novice users,
it works great.
It always does mostly what you expect,
except when it tells you that it
can't find this app and that app,
and that you have to use ResetIt to
change the type in creator.
Aside from those minor details,
it's pretty good.
But we want to make it better,
in particular for more advanced users.
In other words,
we want it to make easier to use
and more powerful at the same time.
And that's not easy.
Let me tell you, that's not easy.
That's what we're trying to
do with Mac OS X in general,
but this is particularly an area where
the ease of use is very important,
and adding new features
also is long overdue.
How does it work?
How does document binding work?
A very important concept
in document binding is the
concept of the document type.
which didn't really
exist in Mac OS 9 before.
You had the file type,
but the file type doesn't tell
you anything about other ways
that you can represent what
the format of this document is.
One way is the file type.
That's definitely true.
But there might be other ways.
For example, extensions,
which are used on other
operating systems,
on the internet more frequently.
And in some cases,
just the content of the file,
maybe there's a header that contains
a signature or something like that,
can tell you some information
about what this file format is.
So we've abstracted that by having
this concept of a document type.
And that's just a string,
arbitrary length, that defines that.
You define those strings
inside your information plist.
I'll show an example in a while,
what it looks like.
But for each type of
document that you know about,
basically, you'll have an entry.
And this entry will be indexed
by that document type string.
Other info:
the type and creator that can be used
to identify the type of document.
Again, this is specific to HFS,
stored in the HFS metadata.
We support that if it's there, you know,
if you have an HFS volume format and
your document has a type and creator,
of course we're going to use that.
But we also want to work
when it's not there.
So it's optional because
HFS might not always be around
where your documents are stored.
Okay, so file extension is
something new to Mac OS.
Mac OS never had the concept
of file extensions per se,
and we're introducing that and trying
to have some nice support for it.
The definition of a file extension
on Mac OS X is it's something at the
end of a file name that's up to 32
characters in length after a dot.
Some things to keep in mind
about extensions is that
they are not localized,
so you don't have to worry about having
different versions of the extension for
different localization and all that.
That's not the case.
That's not intended to be localized.
They are not case sensitive either.
And the characters that you can use in
extension is actually fairly reduced.
You can use A to Z, 0 to 9,
and the characters $%, _, and ~.
And if there are any other
characters that you really,
really want to use for some reason,
let us know about it.
But I think that with this,
we're covering enough.
And the reason why we're limiting the
character set is because by doing that,
the users still have the freedom
to use anything that's not dead,
basically.
An example of that is that we have
also another limitation that if
an extension has only one or two
Digits in it.
We don't consider it to be an extension.
And why do we do that?
Well, because we want to allow you to
have something like surfpaint 1.0
and not have us confused and say,
".o?" What kind of extension is that?
I wonder if there's an
application that can open .o?
So .0 is not an extension.
.0.revb is not an extension either.
Can you tell me why?
It has spaces in it, exactly.
To be continued dot dot dot is not an
extension either for a number of reasons
because dot is not a valid character
and depending on how you parse it you
might actually consider that it's empty.
Some valid extensions, on the other hand,
are the always popular xvnd.386,
foo.c, well that's an extension that you
might have heard of and used before.
And Doug.SurfPant.
I can't say the case,
but you see the difference, right?
They're the same.
They're the same extensions.
Like I said,
the case doesn't matter as far
as extensions are concerned.
And that's another example that
shows you that if you want,
you can have--it's not just
three characters anymore.
It's up to 32.
So you can use your entire
application name if it makes sense.
Of course,
if you already have some extensions that
are defined for your document types,
because your application
is cross-platform,
for example, and you had to deal with
those issues before,
use the same thing that you
have on those other platforms.
The whole point of this is to
make interoperability easier.
So don't have extensions
that are Mac OS X specific,
because that would be
kind of missing the point.
If you want something
that's Mac OS X specific,
use type and creator.
Don't use extensions.
Okay.
This is something that we're going to
try to implement as soon as possible,
but it's not yet in DAP4.
And that's a hint.
And I want to talk to you about
that because that's something that
I think it's important that you're
aware of and think about it,
because we could do some
interesting stuff with that.
A hint is basically it's a
sequence of bytes in the first K,
the first 1024 bytes of a document.
That can help us identify
what the document is.
That's also referred to
as a magic cookie in Unix.
That's one of the good things of Unix,
see?
There are some.
And that's also something
that's used sometimes.
Not all popular document
formats have that,
but very frequently they do.
For example, Acrobat PDF files,
the first four bytes of an Acrobat
PDF file are always percent PDF.
So if you just look at those four bytes,
you have a PDF file,
even if you have no extension
and the typing creator has
been lost for some reason.
So putting all this together,
if you have a document that's
just called image.jpg without any
type in creator-- maybe that's
something that you just downloaded.
Maybe it's an MP3 from
Metallica or something.
Well,
we can still tell from the extension
that the type is JPEG file.
If you have the type,
we're going to use that.
And even if there is no extension,
even if it's just called image,
again the same thing, we're going to know
that it's a JPEG file.
And finally,
if it has just the name image,
no extension, and no type in creator,
by looking at the proper byte
sequence at the beginning of the file,
which for JPEGs happens to be FFD8, FFE0,
we're going to know still
that it's a JPEG file.
What's important is that
in those three cases,
no matter how,
the end result is the same.
We know that it is a JPEG file.
And once we have that information,
we go on to the next step,
which is going to be to find the
application to use to open that thing.
The way this works on Mac OS 9 is that
there's the infamous desktop database
that needs to be rebuilt every so often.
It's a per volume database,
which was a problem for us,
because we wanted something
that would follow the user
rather than work differently
depending on where you log on.
And one machine does something
and another does something
completely different.
So we wanted something that had more
customization that was more per user.
And also,
there were other serious limitations.
It was very difficult to extend,
to add any sort of information
beyond what it already knew.
It was already trained,
but what it's holding.
And it only knows about type and
creator and the extensions and all that.
So basically,
the desktop database will continue
to be used by Mac OS 9 and Classic.
The Mac OS X Finder still maintains it.
So if you copy an application that has--
A Mac OS 9 application, for example,
between two volumes,
Mac OS X Finder will do the same
thing that the Mac OS 9 Finder did,
which is to update the desktop
database appropriately so
that they're all synchronized.
But it's only used as a fallback
when there is no other information.
The preferred mechanism that we use
now is a registration mechanism,
which is not that different
from the desktop database,
which means that before we
know about an application,
we have to run into it.
There are a few well-known locations,
which is basically where we
are going to recommend users
that they store their apps.
And that's not going to be /bin/app.
And they're not going to
have to put them there.
They can really put
them anywhere they want.
But there's few well-known locations.
We'll go in there and we'll
look to see if there are any new
applications that have been installed,
anything that has changed.
And we'll use that kind of as a basis.
We'll start with that
as a starting point.
So it's the applications folder.
And in DP4,
there are several applications folder,
probably too many applications folder.
We'll clean that up eventually.
But we'll still look in those places
where we have those applications folder.
If for some reason an application
has not been registered yet,
launching it will do that,
and sometimes just looking
at it will do that.
The point is, even though there is this
registration step that's necessary,
very often you won't even see it.
Worst case,
what can happen is you double-click
on the document and it needs an
application we've never seen before.
We're going to ask you, you know,
I don't know about this document,
where's the app for that?
You're going to find the app,
and that will be it.
We'll remember from now on, you know,
oh yeah, that app, okay, fine.
And as a side effect,
we'll probably register all the
apps that were next to it too,
because we'll figure out, hmm,
maybe there are some other
interesting stuff in there.
OK, when we run into an application,
we try to learn as much
as possible about it.
We remember where it lives.
And we look inside the P list to
extract all the information in there,
such as what is the
signature of the application,
the bundle name, its version number,
creation date, et cetera.
And we're going to use subsequently
that information to find back which
application we're supposed to launch.
So that, for example,
unlike-- which is another limitation
of desktop database today-- it's
basically the last application
that got registered that wins.
And the registration in the
desktop database is non-trivial.
So that means that if you have
a version of Photoshop 4 and
Photoshop 5 on the same disk,
you double-click on something
on the Photoshop document,
and sometimes one version will launch,
sometimes another version will launch.
And you never know which one.
So, because we have now all
this additional information,
such as the version number
and creation date and so on,
that allows us to give preference to
more recent versions over older versions,
for example.
The application signature,
if you're a Carbon developer,
you may be familiar with that already.
It's a four-character code.
I will remind you that there
are some invalid ones that
you're not supposed to use,
which are 0, four question marks,
and four spaces.
If for some reason you
don't have a signature,
which can happen,
maybe you're a Cocoa app who
never had a signature and,
you know,
Use four question marks when
you don't know what to use.
We encourage you to register your
app signature and to get one.
At the end of the talk, I have a
URL that you can go to to do that.
So if you don't have a signature,
it's really easy to get and
it can be useful to have.
There are two ways that
the bundle information,
the binding information,
can be specified.
One is the way that
it's always been done,
using a BNDL resource and
all its related resources,
to indicate which file
types you know about,
what the icons for those file
types are supposed to be.
And that's pretty much all
you can specify using a BNDL.
It's rather limited.
We still support that if
you're a Carbon application
or a classic application.
We'll find out that information,
register that, and we'll live with it.
But if you do that,
that means that you have
no way of telling us,
oh, by the way, those PDF files, OK,
sure they can have the
signature PDF space.
But I also know how to deal with
them if you find a file that has
the extension .pdf that you download
from the internet or whatever.
So with the BNDL resource,
you can't tell us all that.
With the PList, you can.
And the way you use the PList-- so again,
you have two choices,
depending on how your
application is packaged-- if
your package is a single file--
As your application might
be today on Mac OS 9,
then you just add a PL/ST resource
that contains the same content
that an Info.plist would.
Otherwise, you can just have the
Info.plist file in there.
That's what's inside the Info.plist file.
It has a number of keys.
It's an XML file, as I mentioned before.
The number of keys and different values.
You have some things such as the name,
the identifier,
which is used to unique--so that we have
a unique identifier for your application,
other information, signature, version,
get info string, et cetera.
And then, for each type of documents
that you know about,
you specify what the type name is,
the icon file to use,
what the valid extensions
for that type are.
There might be more than one.
Think about HTML and HTML, for example.
The OS types and the role.
And the role is kind of
something interesting.
You can specify whether your app actually
doesn't know how to handle this type
of documents but just knows about them,
can provide an icon, for example,
or whether you can actually view
them or just edit them or print
them or provide runtime services.
So there are different--again,
those are hints that you can provide us
that can help us choose which application
is best given what the user wants to do.
And at this point,
I'm going to show you--
What a P-List looks like.
I'm going to try to do that quickly.
I'm going to use a...
BBEdit for that.
Why not?
So I'm going to go inside
the directory of my app here,
so I find app, contents,
and I'm going to have to say, oh,
I want any file in there.
And that's my plist here.
Let me make the text a little bigger.
So, as you see, they don't lie,
it's an XML file.
I've added some comments too,
because you can have comments in there.
If you don't have to for your app,
you're free to do
whatever you want there.
You can have some comments and
you have the different keys.
So the bundle name, for example.
This one is actually an important
one because that's the key that
we use to know what to put in
the top left of the menu here.
So that's what we call the
short name of the application.
So user visible name.
The identifier, the type and creator,
and so on.
And on and on and on.
And so here you have the list
of all the documents that this
application knows how to deal with.
That's kind of what it looks like.
And then there's a little bit more that
I'm going to talk about in a minute.
I have a few more slides to go through,
and I'd like to have some time for Q&A,
so I'm going to go a little faster.
Fasten your seat belts.
All right.
So here, very quickly,
a few examples about how it would work.
Let's say that you have a document
created by a Carbon and Classic app,
type in creator, and the user did not
do any customization.
Just a quick word about that.
It will be possible for a
user to either globally say,
I want all my HTML files to
always open with Dreamweaver,
no matter who they were created with.
That will be an option.
That's not in DP4 yet,
but we'll have that by the time we ship,
hopefully.
So that's one way that a
user can override something.
And you can also do that
on a file by file basis,
where you could say, this file,
I created it in Dreamweaver,
but from now on,
I want it to open in Explorer.
And you can do that without
using ResetIt and changing the
creator and all that stuff.
So, if there is none of that,
no user customization,
you double-click on it,
we'll look for the most recent
application with a given creator,
and we'll use that.
It's exactly the behavior that
you would have today in Mac OS 9.
That's kind of like the vanilla case.
Very simple.
If you download a file from the internet,
and this file has no type in creator,
and let's say it ends in .pdf, and again,
it knows special user settings,
we will look,
see which applications know-- well,
first we'll find out .pdf,
what type is that.
We'll find out it's
Acrobat PDF documents.
And then again,
we'll use the most recent app that knows
how to deal with those type of documents.
Now, here's a case where the user
has specified an override.
They said that there
is no type in creator,
the extension is .html,
but the user has said,
I want all my HTML files to
open with Internet Explorer,
in general, except for this one that
should open with Dreamweaver.
Follow me there?
So it's kind of like you
have several levels of
OverEye that the user can provide is
definitely more for advanced users,
but it's an important feature
for some of our customers.
And in that case,
when you double-click on it,
Dreamweaver will open it.
Pretty simple.
A few words about installation.
Now that we have this box
with all the stuff in it,
well, how do you put stuff in it?
You have to open the box?
Not necessarily.
In the P-List,
there are a few additional keys that
you can provide that can be very useful.
Those keys can provide us information
about what items can be installed
optionally in your application,
where those items are supposed to
be installed in your application,
and where we can find them, too.
So, for example,
you can specify a source for where
those files are supposed to come from,
and a list of those files.
And for each of those files,
going to specify what
the name of the item is.
You can specify a
description that's optional.
You can specify where on the CD,
for example, this file is to be found,
where it's supposed to be installed,
and whether the item should
be just copied over or whether
an installer should be run,
which is the case you say that the
action should be open and we just
launch the installer for that item.
Let me show you what it looks like.
So if I go back to my plist,
some other information I have in
there is the installation information.
So that's the key I was talking about,
the bundle installer key info.
Here I specify where the source
of the files I want to install is.
In this case,
it's a volume that's called surfpand.
That's going to be my installer CD.
And then I have a list of items.
Here, for example,
I have a list of color palettes
in my fictitious application
that users can install.
This is the path on the
CD where those items are stored.
And this is where they
go inside my bundle.
So no matter where the application is,
that's where they're installed.
And now the specific items in
this color palette category that
describes the different items.
And here I've been very simple,
just given the file
name for all the items.
You could also specify
a description and so on.
And optionally,
some other keys such as whether the
item should just be copied over,
opened,
that's what I was talking about earlier.
If you want, you can make it very simple,
which is what I did here,
and just specify the minimum,
which is just the file name.
Here I have the same thing
for another category,
which is plugins.
Exactly the same kind
of information there.
So once you have all that,
let me show you what you can do with it.
I'm going to quit Mac Draw.
And let's see.
[Transcript missing]
So I earlier installed that,
and all it means is
I just dragged it over.
Really not that complicated.
I'm going to go back to the application
files panel that I showed you earlier.
And in this pop-up are
different categories of things.
One of them is a list of localizations.
So, for example, the user could decide
to install just English,
if that's what they want,
or just one localization.
And if there are others
that are available,
at a later time they can just click
the install button to add them to
their application or to remove them
if they don't want them anymore.
So that's a default category
that's always there.
And those are the two
others that I've added,
that I've shown you in the plist:
the color palettes and the plugins.
Those are the files that
I specified in my P-list,
and that's what gets displayed here.
And you see here on the status column,
it tells you whether the item
is already installed or not.
If it's not installed,
you can just select it.
I have
The CD in the computer,
which is right there.
Let me go back to my app.
And if I just click
here and click install,
it's going to look on the CD.
It has copied it.
It was fast because it's a small file.
And voila.
The same way you can remove something
if you don't want it there anymore.
So, same thing with plugins.
So that gives the user some very easy
way to do some very limited installation.
That doesn't mean that you
don't need an installer anymore.
You might still want one.
But at least for some very simple things,
it allows the user to do some
installation without having to
worry about messing up something
because they get access to the
content of the directory directly.
So, a few things for you to do.
Define a type, but also think about
extension for your documents.
Again,
we want to play nice with all the file
system and operating systems out there.
You should consider having a unique
signature for your application.
I'm sorry.
Well, that's true for your application,
but also for your document format.
If it's an existing document format,
you may not have this option.
But if it's a new one,
really think about it.
Register a signature for your app.
That's the URL I was talking about.
You can go there to register
a signature and make sure it
doesn't conflict with someone else.
And finally,
really seriously consider using a plist,
either as a single file or even better,
as an application package.
I hope I've showed you the advantages
that we can have to end it,
you know, if we all work together on
improving the user experience,
if you use application packages
and Info.plist to tell us
more about your application.
Basically, that's what it's all about.
If you are still thirsty
for more information,
here are a few resources:
Tech Note 1118 describes
the Mac OS 9 packages,
which are called bundles now.
That's the URL where you can find it.
And on the DP4 CD at this path,
there's a system overview that
goes into what I've talked about,
and you can go back to see
what the keys are and so on.
So it goes into more detail.
But that's, again, on your DP4 CD.
And at this point,
I'd like to ask-- I'm basically done
with what I had to tell you today.
Thank you for your attention.